okay so in some of the earlier computer
file videos I talked about utility
functions or objective functions and we
got a lot of different comments relating
to that idea one thing people said was
well surely this kind of monomaniacal
following of a single utility function
at the cost of everything else is really
the cause of the problem in the first
place why even use a utility function or
maybe have several conflicting ones that
interact with each other or something
like that some people asked why do we
assume that an AI will have a utility
function in the first place aren't we
making a pretty strong assumption about
the design of the AI when in fact we
don't know how it would be implemented
humans don't have explicit utility
functions that they consult when they're
making their decisions a lot of
different AI designs people are working
on now don't have utility functions
coded into them explicitly so why make
that kind of unwarranted assumption so
before we get into that let's just go
over what a utility function is okay so
here's the earth or the universe it can
be in any one of several different
states so let's just look at three
possible world states in this world I'm
enjoying a pleasant cup of tea in this
world I've run out of milk so the tea
isn't quite how I'd like it to be and in
this world I'm being stung by noon two
wasps we want some way of expressing
that I have preferences over these world
states some of them are better for me
than others so a utility function is a
function which takes as an argument a
world state and outputs a number saying
broadly speaking how good that world is
for me how much utility I get from it so
in this example perhaps a nice cup of
tea is worth 10 a a mediocre cup of tea
is worth nine and the wasps are minus a
thousand but Rob you might say that's
way too simple I care about all kinds of
things and what I what I love about the
world is is complex and nuanced you
currently steal everything down to just
a single number on each world state note
with that attitude you can and you kind
of have to but let's just forget about
the numbers for now and talk about
preferences
let's make some basic assumptions about
your preferences the first one is that
you do have preferences given any two
states of the world you could decide
which one you would prefer to happen or
you could be indifferent but there's
this basic trilemma here for any pair of
world states a and B either a is
preferable to B or B is preferable to a
or you're indifferent between a and B it
doesn't matter to you which one happens
always exactly one of these things is
true hopefully that should be obvious
but just think about what it would mean
for it not to be true like what would it
mean to not prefer A to B not prefer B
to a and also not be indifferent between
DNA similarly what would it mean to
prefer A to B and simultaneously prefer
B to a if you're faced with a choice
then between a and B what do you do the
second basic assumption is transitivity
so you have this relation between States
is preferable to and you assume that
this is transitive which just means that
if you prefer A to B and you prefer B to
C then you prefer a to C again this
seems intuitively pretty obvious but
let's look at what it would mean to have
intransitive preferences let's say I
prefer being an Amsterdam to being in
Beijing and I prefer being in Beijing to
being in Cairo and I prefer being in
Cairo to being in Amsterdam what happens
if I have these preferences let's say I
start out in Amsterdam I prefer being in
Cairo so I get on a plane and I flied to
Qatar now I'm in Cairo and I find
actually I prefer being in Beijing so I
get on the plane I fly to Beijing I'm
now in Beijing and I say oh you know
actually I prefer to be in Amsterdam so
I slide around stir done and now I'm
back where I started and hey what do you
know I prefer to be in Cairo so you can
see that if your preferences are
transitive you can get sort of stuck in
a loop where you just expend all of your
resources flying between cities or in
some other way changing between options
and this doesn't seem very smart so if
we accept these two pretty basic
assumptions about your preferences then
we can say that your preferences are
coherent you may have noticed there
something else that has these two
properties which is the greater than
relation on numbers for any two numbers
a and B either a is greater than B B is
greater than a or a and B are equal and
if a is greater than B and B is greater
than C then a is greater than C the fact
that preferences and numbers share these
properties is relevant here so if your
preferences are coherent they'll define
an order overworld States that is to say
given your preferences you could take
every possible world state and arrange
them in order of how good they offer you
there will be a single ordering
overworld States you know there aren't
any loops because your preference is a
transitive now if you have an ordering
of world States there will exist a set
of numbers for each world state they
correspond to that ordering perhaps you
could just take them all in order and
give each one a number according to
where it falls in the ordering so those
are your utility values for any coherent
preferences there will be a set of
utility values that exactly represents
it and if you have a utility value on
every world state well there will be
some function which takes in world
States and return to their utility
values and that's your utility function
so if you have consistent preferences
you have a utility function but Rob you
may say I don't have consistent
preferences I'm a human being my
preferences are all over the place
that's true human beings do not reliably
behave as though they have consistent
preferences but that's just because
human intelligence is kind of badly
implemented our inconsistencies don't
make us better people it's not some
magic key to our humanity or secret to
our effectiveness or whatever it's not
making us smarter or more empathetic or
more ethical it's just making us make
bad decisions talking about utility
functions is actually a way of assuming
very little about the design of an AI
other than assuming that it has coherent
goal directed behavior it doesn't matter
how its implemented if it's effective at
navigating the world to get what it once
it will behave as though it has a
particular utility function and this
means if you're going to build an agent
with coherent goal directed behavior
you'd better make sure it has the right
utility function
[Music]
just wanted to say thank you to my
patreon supporters the three people who
somehow managed to support me before I
even mentioned in the video that I was
setting up a patreon and I especially
want to thank Chad Jones who's pledged
$10 a month thank you so much it really
means a lot to me that there are people
out there who think what I'm doing is
worth supporting
so thanks again